## Managers and Individual Contributors

Software development teams are comprised mostly of software developers who are individual contributors (ICs). Software developers are managed by engineering managers. Often managers were software developers earlier in their careers. 

In large, high functioning teams, this distinction between the people who build, and the people who manage is clear an unambiguous. Peoples' roles fall into one or the other category with equivalent but different career development tracks that both theoretically lead to the same maximum seniority level. At startups, there is less need of formal management so the distinction between managers and ICs doesn't make sense early on. This means that as companies scale, they need to transition over time from a model where everyone is kind of a software developer of roughy equivalent seniority, to one where there are managers and individual contributors with different scopes of responsibilty that correspond to levels of seniority. The is a complicated shift to make over time. Even at scale, there is in how to sustain and evolve manager and IC roles over time. 

Andy Grove talks about the distinctions between what managers do and what individual contributors do in his book <u>High Output Management</u>. In Grove's framework, managers lead people, and individual contributors lead other resources like technology stacks, and infrastructure.

### People, Process, and Product
One model for thinking about the responsibilities of a software product engineering team is to broadly organize those resonsibilities into three areas: people, process, and product. And product decomposes into product management and technology management. We'll dive in more to the complexities of product management vs technology management in another chapter. For now, we'll focus on how responsibility is delegated to managers and ICs within this model. Managers are responsible for managing people as they collaborate to deliver project work and grow their careers. ICs are responsible for managing technology and how people work with technology to deliver project work and grow their careers. As a person grows in their career and is promoted to higher levels of seniority, the scope of their people or technology responsibilities grows. Managers in particular have to work extra hard to communicate and maintain the ownership boundaries of these three broad areas of responsibility, and in particular not overstep into oversteering the team's product and technology decisions.

### Individual Contributor Responsibilities
A simple way to understand the technology responsibilities of an individual contributor is to explore how those resonsibilities grow in scope over time as an IC grows their capability and seniority. When a software developer is beginning their career, typically as a junior software developer, they will be part of a team that is responsible for a technology or product. During their first year or so, they are assigned small, well-defined tasks that can be completed within hours or days. Their scope of responsibility is smaller than a product feature or technical sub-component. After demonstrating proficiency at this scope, junior engineers are promoted to software developers. Software developer scope is at the feature or sub-component level. The tasks they take on span days or weeks. Ideally, a given software developer is not the only one working on a particular feature or sub-component but a given individual will often be considered the owner of that unit of the product or technology. Software developers are strongly coupled to a specific development team. While there are no hard fast rules for time in role, there are heuristics used across the technology sector. Software developers typically spend 2 to 5 years in role before scaling their capability to a point where they are ready to take on a senior software developer role. The scope of a senior software developer abstracts beyond the boundaries of their team's responsibilities. As a result, they will sometimes work outside of their immediate team on work that spans team boundaries. As an example, they may be responsible for upgrading a data storage layer used by one of their team's key features, but that storage layer might be owned by a second team, and also get used by other teams. So they have to interact with multiple teams, while also getting the system updgraded in a way that suits their core team's system. To get the job done well, the senior software developer will have to expand their scope of influence beyond their current team, even as they continue to report to the team's manager from the perspective of the org chart. After multiple years of demonstrating capability at the senior level, most organizations of more than several dozen software engineers will have a prinicipal software engineering role. At the principal level, a developer's responsibilities grow to product or full technology component scope. At this seniority, it will no longer make sense for them to be associated with a single development team and they will often get new more senior manager after being promoted. Principal engineers consult and guide the technology decisions and implementation for multiple software developments teams. They help ensure cohesion in the overall technology that is used to evolve a software product. Beyond principal engineer, large organizations maintain more senior engineering roles with titles like senior principal or staff engineer. In these roles, the scope of influence over technology expands to the organization level. These senior leaders are key business decision makers who use their deep understanding of technology, the business, and industry to influence the entire organization. While different organizations have different numbers of seniority levels, the individual contributor track should have a clear line of sight to the most senior level of responsibility in the business, equivalent to the level to which managers can grow.

Of note is that notwithstanding the moniker 'individual contributor,' IC roles are actually anything but solitary. ICs actually carry many people leadership responsibilities, as distinct people management responsbilities, in the form of mentorship, community involvement, and business representation. These are distinct from the people management responsibilities taken on by managers. Generally, every level of software developer maintains mentorship responsibilities with more junior ICs and mentee relationships with more senior folks. This is one of the key ways that ICs grow their capabilities in the direction they want to take their career over time. Most often, these mentee-mentor relationships take the form of periodic one-on-one meetings. In addition, software developers, particularly at the principal level or above participate actively in communities inside and outside of their immediate organizations. As a manager myself, I've never been formally involved in these communities but have always admired the endless amount of creativity that very senior groups of software developers bring to evolving their craft. Some examples of activities I've seen over the years include, academic paper reviews, new technology deep dives, private IC-only Slack channels, internal and external design reviews, book groups, hackathons, and even cooking clubs. The most senior individual contributors are also key stakeholders in business decision making. Principal and more senior engineers bring a perspective to roadmap and business review meetings that managers often can't.

### Manager Responsibilities
A key difference in the career progression of managers and ICs is that almost no one in software development starts out as a manager. Most people who manage software developers have been software developers themselves, or in some cases product managers. The most common career path into engineering management is for software developers with five to ten years of tenure to self-select into a management role instead of growing into the next level of responsibility on the IC track (usually senior software developer). Engineering managers take on management responsibilities for a single development team and are responsible for collaborating with product managers and individual contributors to define and sequence the team work will take on. They also operate and evolving the software development process that the team uses to deliver and communicate with their team and leadership to set accurate expectations on delivery. Engineering managers maintain a healthy team through individual career development, performance management, and hiring.

After developing their manager's skill set for several years, engineering managers grow into senior engineering managers, responsible for managing multiple teams, usually via their direct team of other managers and senior ICs. Senior manager scope spans multiple large product capabilities or even an entire product. Senior managers grow into engineering directors, who are responsible for large orgs that build, ship, and operate entire products or product groups. 

As with ICs, the amount of interaction that managers need to undertake with other teams scales with their level of responsibility.


### Individual Contributor and Manager Seniority Equivalence
The most successful software development teams maintain a balance of power between people leaders and technology leaders who collaborate to deliver value for customers. Ideally, individual contributors and managers of equivalent seniority have an equivalent level of responsibility and authority over different domains: technology and people management. In reality though, there is a tension between achieving this balance on one hand, and how org charts and business processes interact on the other. 

On the org chart, individual contributors at a given level of seniority often report to a manager at the same level of seniority. For example, at Amazon, it's common for Principal Engineers to report to Senior Directors of Engineering even though both are level 7 employees on the Amazon seniority scale. 

Business processes that require manager involvement sometimes overlook or underrepresent IC involvement. This leads to a couple of common issues.

First, some senior managers and directors, particularly those new to a given level of seniority, will over-manage the ICs of equivalent seniority that report to them. With the best of intentions, the manager will tell themselves that they are the IC's manager, and therefore are supposed to know better than the IC what the team needs to do next. This then manifests as the manager telling the IC what they should be working on at too granular a level, or worse, how they should solve a given technical problem. In this case, the manager has been misled by their understanding of the org chart and role responsbilities into thinking that they are supposed to be in charge. ICs of equivalent seniority will understand the technical requirements of project work as well as the manager and in most cases will have more technical depth on the solution domain for a given technial problem than their manager. Great IC-Manager relationships between folks of equivalent seniority are partnerships more than manager-direct relationshipsgit . I've found these relationships work best when both parties think of themselves as sounding boards for where the other wants to lead. Some examples will help illustrate the point...

Second, unseasoned managers sometimes follow the incorrect intuition that they, strictly speaking, are somehow more empowered than ICs to make final decisions on how technology and products evolve. This usually manifests as a manager claiming a manager's veto on technology decisions when they disagree with their IC direct report of equivalent seniority. This is disempowering for ICs and leads to bad technical decisions. 

Fourth, managers failing to 

The easiest way to understand why equality is so important is to explore the consequences of inequality between ICs and managers. 

There are several principles that teams need to keep top of mind make the individual contributor and manager model work.

ICs are Leaders, not Managers

Managers are Technical, but not ICs

As with most anti-patterns, this one is motivated by good intentions. Since managers are responsible for running the delivery processes for the team, and they themselves will typically have a decent level of technical depth, i 








