## Culture

Culture is one of the hardest topics to wrestle with while scaling an organization, so let's start with culture. Culture is hard for three interacting reasons. First, culture is hard to define. Second, culture is hard to intentionally change. Third, culture is a vital ingredient to whether an organization succeeds or fails. 

As a working definition, culture is the set of values, practices, attitudes, and styles that determine how people in an organization operate. I think of culture as the operating system for a company. Just as an operating system determines how processes run and users experience their devices, culture determines how company processes work and how employees and customers experience an organziation. Culture is omnipresent but without a tangible representation in the real world. There is no one detail you can point at and say "that's our culture." You might say that some event, or meeting was aligned to the company's culture, or that some business decision was inconsistent with company values, but those events and decisions, and whatever else, are not themselves culture. Everything a company does has culture embedded, but nothing is itself culture. The intangibility of culture means that there is a lot of interpretation that has to occur for anyone to describe a groups's culture, let alone figure out how to change it. 

As with anything open to interpretation, culture can be the source of a lot of disagreement. And disagreement can be uncomfortable. There are two ways to handle this. Either an organization can embrace the discomfort and myriad interpretations of culture, or not talk about culture. I don't believe the second path is a viable option. Just as computers don't work very well without operating systems, organizations don't work very well without an articulated culture, however imperfect and assailable that articulation might be.

So culture is hard to define and hard to see in any tangible form. These traits also make established culture hard to change. The biggest opportunity to set culture is right when an organization is just starting out. I have been amazed, in every organization I've been a part of, by the staying power of the initial culture set by founders and the earliest employees, whether intentionally or not. Organizations whose founding team give careful thought to what their values are, articulate them, and then authentically live those values as they figure out how to scale the company, are better positioned than those who don't.

The easiest way I've seen to talk about culture is to come up with a set of organization values or principles that provide the best possible approximation of how all stakeholders think about the organization's culture. After version one of organization's values are built, they need to be broadcast for all to see, usually externally and internally. Once published, values will then inevitably be forever discussed, debated, and leveraged to meet organizational goals. The best values are those that are both authentic and have staying power. Some values won't stand the test of time. New ones will need to be added. These changes won't be comfortable. But the discomfort and the best effort articulation of culture through values helps business scale.

Culture, as expressed through an organization's values or principles, enables scaling in several ways. First, having a published set of values or principles accelerates decision making, particularly for tough decisions. When organizations are faced with big decisions full of ambiguity, choosing the option that is most aligned to organizational values is usually the best call. Making decisions this way is faster than churning on the diminishing returns of yet more rounds of analysis. Second, culture in a rapidly scaling organization is one of the few constants. Consider an employee who has been with a company that has scaled 70% year on year for three years. At the end of year three, that employee will have four times as many co-workers as they started with, most of whom will have joined in the last year. Most of the processes, and tools that the employee onboarded to when they joined will be long gone. Some parts of the business, if not most, will be straining under the pressure of trying to keep up with rapid growth. Going to the office will mean going to a different physical space. There will be new senior leaders and likely key early employees will have left. The employee's role, duties, and manager will likely have changed multiple times. If the culture was set at the beginning of the three years with intention and authenticity, then the company's values will be the most familiar thing to that employee. And those values will have been integral to making the many fast decisions with imperfect information that enabled the company to sustain rapid growth.


The importance of culture is proportional to the rate that an organization is scaling.


Meta's Mark Zuckerberg - Move Fast and Break Things

Amazon is a great example of how culture works. Amazon has it's Leadership Principles. Two new leadership principles.



