## Change Drivers

The need to scale an organization is driven by changes in that organization's situation. The most successful organizations are those that respond best to change. The best responses are those that are fast and efficient, in the sense that they deal with the change completely with the minimal expenditure of resources.

Change is what drives organizations to scale. Having a framework for the different types of change that organization into action is a foundational piece to understanding how to scale. Change is a broad term. In this case we're talking about changes that are extrinsic to a organizational team. In this book we're mostly focused on product development teams but this framework for how think about extrinsic change is applicable to any organization or team. Importnt to note is that a team's own actions can be an input into creating extrinsic change but the types of change we'll explore in this chapter are external to the team. When a team's actions drive change, which drives more action, which drives more change, a feedback loop is present. Team's often participate in feedback loops but our aim here is to deconstruct this model to only look at changes that happen outside of a team so that we can then build mental models for how to act on those changes. As an example, a team might ship a product that gets traction but the traction itself is an external change. Or a team might contribute inputs that help raise new financing, but the balance sheet change created by the financing is extrinsic. The objective of this chapter is to layout different types of change so we can then discuss how to adapt to each type. From an given team's perspective, there are three different types of change: change in demand, change in priority, and change in resources.

### Change in Demand
As products evolve, and entropy moves the universe through time, what and how much value customers derive from an organization's products changes. As a product's value to customers changes, demand changes. Changes in demand can be driven by many factors that subcategorize into microeconomic, macroeconmic, or organization driven. 

Some of the big microecomic drivers for changes in demand are changes in the competitive landscape and regulatory changes. Competitive landscapes are dynamic and ever-shifting. And the competitive landscape is much broader than just an organizations competitors. Products offer utility which customers can acquire via substitutes that go well beyond what direct competitors offer. As an example, consider cloud computing. Analysts talk about Amazon Web Services, Microsoft Azure, and Google Cloud being competitors. Yes, these are competitors in a business sense, but from a customer perspective, there are many other ways to get the basic utilities of computing other than through cloud providers. The point here is that competitive landscapes are like highly complex organisms that are impossible to completely understand. As a consequence, understanding how competitive landscapes are changing demand at a precise level is impossible. The best most organizations can do is to understand the landscape enough to generate and validate hypothesis to inform how best to respond to the changing landscape.

Regulatory changes alter the rules of what demand is allowed. Regulatory changes are easier to observe and  reason about than competitive landscape changes because they are discrete units, written down for all read and interpret. A good example of how regulatory change impacts demand is the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR). The European Union passed GDPR legislation in 2016. Demand changed in a number of ways as a result of GDPR. Immediately after GDPR past, customers added GDPR compliance to their standard set of requirements for their product vendors. Those that were slow to comply saw their demand drop until they could demonstrate compliance. GDPR also increased demand for organizations that made it easier for other organizations to comply. So GDPR consultants, or cloud services with GDPR compliance built in saw demand go up.

The actions, or lack thereof, that organizations take to change their products and how they communicate about their products also change demand. New features and capabilities are shipped to expand the value that customers derive. Prices are adjusted to optimize customer price to value ratios. Marketing deliver messaging about products to increase awareness and drive interest. All of these create changes in demand.

Having built a framework for the types of changes in demand, the obvious question is: how should organizations invest to respond to these change in demand? Each subcategory of demand change deserves its own response. As noted above, changes in demand or the result of changes in the value customers get from a given product. Organizations that focus on customer value, therefore, are best equipped to respond to changes in demand because they have tooling and models in place to measure and reason about what changes in value might have caused observed changes in demand.

The companies that scale the most successfully are those understand changes in demand through the eyes of the value their customers get from their products. Since competitive landscapes are so difficult to assess directly, this usually means that companies will be able to more efficiently respond to competitive challenges when they simply hear about them from their customers. Unpleasant as the experience might be, hearing a customer tell you the reasons that they are going with a competitor is a better use of time than investing continuously to try to understand what competitors are doing and how that will change demand for your products. Doing competitive intelligence is useful in other ways as this work can yield good unique product ideas or inform the size and shape of a comtemplated opportunity. Constantly monitoring competitors is not the most efficient use of time for the purposes of understanding changes in demand.

Adapting to changes in demand driven by regulatory changes is something all organizations that operate with integrity and according to the rule of law need to do. When a regulatory change occurs, organizations don't need to waste time figuring out whether to adapt to the change in demand, except perhaps when there is some question as to whether regulation is applicable.  Assuming regulation applies, organization need to design and implement the most efficient possible solution to getting compliant. Customers will tell organizations how urgently this works needs to be done. With some regulatory changes, customers have no grace period to be compliant themselves, and therefore will only work with vendors who are themselves compliant. Other regulatory changes can be rolled out with less urgency over time.

Organization driven changes in demand are the most interesting because these are the ones over which organizations have the most control. That being said, "most" is a relative term. Organizations have almost no control over what competitors do or how the competitive landscape changes demand. Likewise, organizations have little control, if any, over big regulatory changes. Organizations have control over product changes, but they don't have much control over how those changes will be received or what the resulting changes in response to those changes will be. Coming back to the claim that the most successful organizations are those that resond the best to change, organization driven changes in demand present the biggest opportunity to dliever more customer value, and therefore respond well to change. As has been documented in many forums[Eric Ries], rigorous measurement, tight feedback loops, and an established set of mechanisms to validate understanding of how customers derive value, with actual customers, are all key to responding to changes in demand driven by what organizations ship. Arguably the hardest part of understanding change in demand driven by what an organization does to its products is the why part. Change might be easy to detect but getting underneath the reasons why that change has occurred is notoriously hard because motivations are hard to measure. The antedote is to rely on discussions with customers where the main goal is connect data about their behaviour to their anecdotes about why they changed their demand in the way they did.


How is demand changing. Why is demand changing.

Understand how demand is changing. Decide what to do about it. 

//here

The positive form of changes in product market is when customers lead an organization to new opportunities. These opportunities drive proactive change. Our customers want X, so let's organize to deliver X. The negative form of product market change occurs when some external force, like a competitor, partner or regulator does something that an organization has to react to. Our customers no longer choose X, because of external force, so we have to change how we deliver X.

Some examples to illustrate the point. 

One common pattern is for a product organization to learn that the key value proposition of products shifts over time across the mix of product capabilities on offer. As an example, consider a social media management software-as-a-service company that offers publishing, analytics, digital asset mangement, and team co-ordination capabilities. Over time, the value mix that customers derive from this product might shift from something like analytics to team co-ordination as both the product market and product capabilities evolve. Such a company would also need to change their team structure to reflect these changes, perhaps by elevating where team co-ordination capabilities report into the broader org structure, by increasing the relative investment in team co-ordination capabilities or by adding new dedicated customer success resources. Such changes require re-organization.

Change in What is Supplied

Change in What is Demanded

Change in Business Priorities

### Change in Business Priorities
Organizations also change their business priorities which sometimes requires organization design changes as well. Scaling software product organizations shift priorities between adoption, growth, and profit margin, or when organizations change product strategy. In the first several years of adoption, software organizations optimize for adding new customers. Then they move evolve the product to deliver more value, and therefore more usage and revenue per customer. These business priorities require organizations to operate at low or negative net margins when starting out. After a product is proven, businesses shift to seeking profitability so that they can become sustainable. They move to sustainability by focusing more on optimizing fixed and variable costs as a percentage of revenue. Such optimizations impact how much investment is available to create new value and grow the business. Or, sometimes organizations just believe that product strategy needs to be adjusted. 

Macro-economic conditions also influence how much to invest in growth vs profitability. In the low interest rate environment of the 2010s, companies and shareholders favored growth. All things being equal, those same businesses move towards profitability when debt and equity investment becomes more expensive, or when the broader economy moves into recession. 

These shifts in priority go in both direction. As organizations create new products or deliver existing product capabilities that increase adoption and growth potential, they may choose to move investment back from profitability towards growth. The same investment mix change towards more growth is also attractive when debt and equity investment becomes less expensive.

All of these shifts in business priorities are supportable with changes in how organizations are designed.

Several examples illustrate the point. 

One common pattern is for companies that have achieved traction to decrease the relative amount of investment they make in research and development. Instead they increase relative investment in things like sales, marketing, human resources, and customer support because the payoff for such investments is usually shorter term and therefore shows up on the bottom line sooner than more product development. Logical org design changes to make in response to this change in priority is to stop hiring new software engineers and reorgnize the product development team to deliver new incremental value instead of longer term big bets. And simultaneously, grow the sales and marketing team to create specialization across multiple marketing channels or customers types.

Business priorities also change when strategy changes. An organization might decide to stay focused on growth but recognize that there is a better opportunity in the development and delivery of a different product. This would logically require a reorganization that shifted resources from current products to the envisioned new product.

### Change in Resources
Another driver of the need to reorganize is when the company finds itself with a suddent new abundance or scarcity of resources. After raising new capital, an organization's leadership will be intentional about what areas of the business to invest in, be it product, sales, marketing or something else. Likewise, mergers and acquisitions leave business with two organizations to rationalize into one. Sometimes spending exceeds revenue by too much and organizations decide to lay off portions of the team to preserve capital. All of these require changes in how the organization is structured. Another special case of resource changes that can necessitate re-organization is the departure or arrival of a key leader. When a CEO leaves, or a VP joins a large org, they will often bring a change in direction, however modest, that requires a re-org.